We address in this paper a model for the simulation of turbulent deflagrations in industrial applications.
The flow is governed by the Euler equations for a variable composition mixture and the combustion
modelling is based on a phenomenological approach: the flame propagation is represented by the
transport of the characteristic function of the burnt zone, where the chemical reaction is complete;
outside this zone, the atmosphere remains in its fresh state. Numerically, we approximate this
problem by a penalization-like approach, i.e. using a finite conversion rate with a characteristic
time tending to zero with the space and time steps. The numerical scheme works on staggered, possibly
unstructured, meshes. The time-marching algorithm is of segregated type, and consists in solving
in a first step the chemical species mass balances and then, in a second step, mass, momentum and energy
balances. For this latter stage of the algorithm, we use a pressure correction technique, and solve
a balance equation for the so-called sensible enthalpy instead of the total energy balance, with
corrective terms for consistency. The scheme is shown to satisfy the same stability properties
as the continuous problem: the chemical species mass fractions are kept in the [0, 1] interval, the
density and the sensible internal energy stay positive and the integral over the computational
domain of a discrete total energy is conserved. In addition, we show that the scheme is in fact conservative,
i.e. that its solution satisfy a conservative discrete total energy balance equation, with space
and time discretizations which are unusual but consistent in the Lax-Wendroff sense. Finally,
we observe numerically that the penalization procedure converges, i.e. that making the chemical
time scale tend to zero allows to converge to the solution of the target (infinitely fast chemistry)
continuous problem. Tests also evidence that the scheme accuracy dramatically depends on the discretization
of the convection operator in the chemical species mass balances. October 14, 2020. 