Context: An island parser reads an input text and builds the parse (or abstract syntax) tree of only
the programming constructs of interest in the text. These constructs are called islands and the
rest of the text is called water, which the parser ignores and skips over. Since an island parser does
not have to parse all the details of the input, it is often easy to develop but still useful enough for
a number of software engineering tools. When a parser generator is used, the developer can implement
an island parser by just describing a small number of grammar rules, for example, in Parsing Expression
Grammar (PEG). Inquiry: In practice, however, the grammar rules are often complicated since the
developer must define the water inside the island; otherwise, the island parsing will not reduce
the total number of grammar rules. When describing the grammar rules for such water, the developer
must consider other rules and enumerate a set of symbols, which we call alternative symbols. Due
to this difficulty, island parsing seems to be not widely used today despite its usefulness in many
applications. Approach: This paper proposes the lake symbols for addressing this difficulty in
developing an island parser. It also presents an extension to PEG for supporting the lake symbols.
The lake symbols automate the enumeration of the alternative symbols for the water inside an island.
The paper proposes an algorithm for translating the extended PEG to the normal PEG, which can be given
to an existing parser generator based on PEG. Knowledge: The user can use lake symbols to define water
without specifying each alternative symbol. Our algorithms can calculate all alternative symbols
for a lake symbol, based on where the lake symbol is used in the grammar. Grounding: We implemented
a parser generator accepting our extended PEG and implemented 36 island parsers for Java and 20 island
parsers for Python. Our experiments show that the lake symbols reduce 42 % of grammar rules for Java
and 89 % of rules for Python on average, excluding the case where islands are expressions. Importance:
This work eases the use of island parsing. Lake symbols enable the user to define the water inside
the island simpler than before. Defining water inside the island is essential to apply island parsing
for practical programming languages. 