Lyme disease is one of the most common infectious vector-borne diseases in the world. In the early
stage, the disease manifests itself in most cases with erythema migrans (EM) skin lesions. Better
diagnosis of these early forms would allow improving the prognosis by preventing the transition
to a severe late form thanks to appropriate antibiotic therapy. Recent studies show that convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) perform very well to identify skin lesions from the image but, there is not
much work for Lyme disease prediction from EM lesion images. The main objective of this study is to
extensively analyze the effectiveness of CNNs for diagnosing Lyme disease from images and to find
out the best CNN architecture for the purpose. There is no publicly available EM image dataset for
Lyme disease prediction mainly because of privacy concerns. In this study, we utilized an EM dataset
consisting of images collected from Clermont-Ferrand University Hospital Center (CF-CHU) of
France and the internet. CF-CHU collected the images from several hospitals in France. This dataset
was labeled by expert dermatologists and infectiologists from CF-CHU. First, we benchmarked this
dataset for twenty-three well-known CNN architectures in terms of predictive performance metrics,
computational complexity metrics, and statistical significance tests. Second, to improve the
performance of the CNNs, we used transfer learning from ImageNet pre-trained models as well as pre-trained
the CNNs with the skin lesion dataset "Human Against Machine with 10000 training images (HAM1000)".
In that process, we searched for the best performing number of layers to unfreeze during transfer
learning fine-tuning for each of the CNNs. Third, for model explainability, we utilized Gradient-weighted
Class Activation Mapping to visualize the regions of input that are significant to the CNNs for making
predictions. Fourth, we provided guidelines for model selection based on predictive performance
and computational complexity. Our study confirmed the effectiveness and potential of even some
lightweight CNNs to be used for Lyme disease pre-scanner mobile applications. We also made all the
trained models publicly available at https://dappem.limos.fr/download.html, which can be used
by others for transfer learning and building pre-scanners for Lyme disease. 