In the prospect of understanding the photoluminescence mechanisms of AlN films doped with erbium
and targeting photonic applications we have synthesized non doped and Er-doped AlN films with different
crystallized nanostructures by using PVD magnetron sputtering. Their crystalline morphology
and their visible photoluminescence properties were precisely measured.Due to the weak cross-section
absorption of rare earths like erbium, it is necessary to obtain an efficient energy transfer mechanism
between the host matrix and the rare earth to obtain high luminescence efficiency. Our strategy
is then to elaborate some nanostructures that could introduce additional intermediate electronic
levels within the gap thanks to the presence of structural defects (point defects, grain boundaries{\ldots})
and could lead to energy transfer from the AlN matrix to the rare earth.Doped and non-doped AlN films
were prepared by radio frequency magnetron sputtering by using different experimental conditions
that will be detailed. It will notably be shown how a negative polarization of samples during deposition
allows obtaining crystalline morphologies ranging from the classical columnar structure to a
highly disordered polycrystalline structure with grains of several nanometers (nearly amorphous).
The nanostructures of the films could be categorized in three types: 1) type 1 was nanocolumnar (width
of column ~ 15 nm), 2) type 2 was made of short columns (width of column ~ 10 nm) and 3) the last type was
made of equiaxed nanocrystallites (size of grains ~3-4 nm).High-resolution photoluminescence
spectroscopy was performed to characterize their optical behaviour. The samples were excited
by the laser wavelengths at 458, 488 or 514 nm. A broad photoluminescence band was observed centred
around 520 nm in columnar samples. In the same energy range, the highly resolved spectra also showed
several sharp emission peaks. This fine structure could be attributed to erbium transitions. This
fine structure tended to disappear going from type 1 to type 3 samples. Indeed, the relative intensity
of the peaks decreased and their full width at half maximum increased. This change could be related
to the density of defects that increased when the size of the grains decreased. The photoluminescence
properties of the films in the visible range will be discussed in relation with their structure.
