Nanofilms of thickness of about two nanometers have been formed at the air-water interface using
functionalized castor oil (ICO) with cross-linkable silylated groups. These hybrid films represent
excellent candidates for replacing conventional polymeric materials in biomedical applications,
but they need to be optimized in terms of biocompatibility which is highly related to protein adsorption.
Neutron reflectivity has been used to study the adsorption of two model proteins, bovine serum albumin
and lysozyme, at the silylated oil (ICO)-water interface in the absence and presence of salt at physiologic
ionic strength and pH and at different protein concentrations. These measurements are compared
to adsorption at the air-water interface. While salt enhances adsorption by a similar degree at
the air-water and the oil-water interface, the impact of the oil film is significant, with adsorption
at the oil-water interface three-to four-fold higher compared to the air-water interface. Under
these conditions, the concentration profiles of the adsorbed layers for both proteins indicate
multilayer adsorption: The thickness of the outer layer (oil-side) is close to the dimension of
the minor axis of the protein molecule, ~ 30 {\AA}, suggesting a side-way orientation with the long
axis parallel to the interface. The inner layer extends to 55-60 {\AA}. Interestingly, in all cases,
the composition of oil film remains intact without significant protein penetration into the film.
The optimal adsorption on these nanofilms, 1.7-2.0 mg$\bullet$m-2 , is comparable to the results
obtained recently on thick solid cross-linked films using quartz crystal microbalance and atomic
force microscopy, showing in particular that adsorption at these ICO film interfaces under standard
physiological conditions is non-specific. These results furnish useful information towards
the elaboration of vegetable oil-based nanofilms, in direct nanoscale applications or as precursor
films in the fabrication of thicker macroscopic films for biomedical applications. 2 