A so-called smart material is a material that is the seat of one or more multiphysical coupling. One
of the key points in the development of the constitutive laws of these materials, either at the local
or at the global scale, is to formulate a free energy density (or enthalpy) from vectors, tensors,
at a given order and for a class of given symmetry, depending on the symmetry classes of the crystal
constituting the material or the symmetry of the representative volume element. This article takes
as a support of study the stress and magnetization couple ($\sigma$, m) involved in the phenomena
of magnetoelastic coupling in a cubic symmetry medium. Several studies indeed show a non-monotonic
sensitivity of the magnetic susceptibility and magnetostriction of certain soft magnetic materials
under stress. Modeling such a phenomenon requires the introduction of a second order stress term
in the Gibbs free energy density. A polynomial formulation in the two variables stress and magnetization
is preferred over a tensorial formulation. For a given material symmetry class, this allows to express
more easily the free energy density at any bi-degree in $\sigma$ and m (i.e. at any constitutive tensors
order for the so-called tensorial formulation). A rigorous and systematic method is essential
to obtain the high-degree magneto-mechanical coupling terms and to build a free energy density
function at any order which is invariant by the action of the cubic (octahedral) group. For that aim,
theoretical and computer tools in Invariant Theory, that allow for the mathematical description
of cubic nonlinear magneto-elasticity, are introduced. Minimal integrity bases of the invariant
algebra for the pair (m, $\sigma$), under the proper (orientation-preserving) and the full cubic
groups, are then proposed. The minimal integrity basis for the proper cubic group is constituted
of 60 invariants, while the minimal integrity basis for the full cubic group (the one of interest
for magneto-elasticity) is made up of 30 invariants. These invariants are formulated in a (coordinate
free) intrinsic manner, using a generalized cross product to write some of them. The counting of
independent invariants of a given multi-degree in (m, $\sigma$) is performed. It is shown accordingly
that it is possible to list without error all the material parameters useful for the description
of the coupled magnetoelastic behavior from the integrity basis. The technique is applied to derive
general expressions $\Psi$ $\star$ ($\sigma$, m) of the free energy density at the magnetic domains
scale exhibiting cubic symmetry. The classic results for an isotropic medium are recovered. 