We demonstrated that the Transition Region Adaptive Conduction (TRAC) method permits fast and
accurate numerical solutions of the field-aligned hydrodynamic equations, successfully removing
the influence of numerical resolution on the coronal density response to impulsive heating. This
is achieved by adjusting the parallel thermal conductivity, radiative loss and heating rates to
broaden the transition region (TR), below a global cutoff temperature, so that the steep gradients
are spatially resolved even when using coarse numerical grids. Implementing the original (one-dimensional)
formulation of TRAC in multi-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) models would require tracing
a large number of magnetic field lines at every time step, in order to prescribe a global cutoff temperature
to each field line. In this paper, we present a highly efficient formulation of the TRAC method for
use in multi-dimensional MHD simulations, which does not rely on field line tracing. In the TR, adaptive
local cutoff temperatures are used instead of global cutoff temperatures, to broaden any unresolved
parts of the atmosphere. These local cutoff temperatures are calculated using only local grid cell
quantities, enabling the MHD extension of TRAC to efficiently account for the magnetic field evolution,
without tracing field lines. Consistent with analytical predictions, we show that this approach
successful preserves the properties of the original TRAC method. In particular, the total radiative
losses and heating remain conserved under the MHD formulation. Results from 2D MHD simulations
of impulsive heating in unsheared and sheared arcades of coronal loops are also presented. These
simulations benchmark the MHD TRAC method against a series of 1D models and demonstrate the versatility
and robustness of the method in multi-dimensional magnetic fields. We show for the first time that
pressure differences, generated during the evaporation phase of impulsive heating events, can
produce current layers that are significantly narrower than the transverse energy deposition.
