We report on the experimental and numerical observation of polarization modulation instability
(PMI) in a nonlinear fiber Kerr resonator. This phenomenon is phased-matched through the relative
phase detuning between the intracavity fields associated with the two principal polarization
modes of the cavity. Our experimental investigation is based on a 12-m long fiber ring resonator
in which a polarization controller is inserted to finely control the level of intra-cavity birefringence.
Depending on the amount of birefringence, the temporal patterns generated via PMI are found to be
either stationary or to exhibit a period-doubled dynamics. Experimental results are in good agreement
with numerical simulations based on an Ikeda map for the two orthogonally polarized modes. Our study
provides new insights into the control of modulation instability in multimode Kerr resonators.
Modulation instability (MI) is a nonlinear phenomenon characterized by the exponential growth
and evolution of periodic perturbations on top of an intense continuous-wave (cw) laser beam [1,
2]. Underpinned by a nonlinearly phase-matched parametric process, it is associated with a transfer
of energy from a narrow pump frequency component to a pair of sidebands arranged symmetrically around
the pump. In single-pass optical fiber propagation, MI can be naturally phase-matched through
a balance between anomalous group-velocity dispersion and Kerr nonlinearity [1, 2]. In contrast,
more general phase-matching conditions are possible in the context of passive Kerr resonators,
such as fiber ring cavities, because of the crucial role played by the systems' boundary conditions
[3-5]. Various configurations of MI have been investigated in that context, including MI in the
normal dispersion regime, MI via bichromatic or incoherent driving, as well as competition between
MI and Faraday or period-doubled (P2) instabilities [6--12]. Moreover, at variance with single-pass
propagation, MI in Kerr resonators can lead to the emergence of stationary periodic (Turing) patterns;
such patterns are now understood to be intimately related to temporal cavity solitons and microresonator
optical frequency combs [13--16]. Birefringence, and nonlinear coupling between the polarization
components of light, is also known to contribute to the phase-matching of parametric processes.
This leads to polarization MI (PMI) and the emergence of vector temporal patterns [17-19]. In driven
resonators, PMI has only been investigated theoretically so far [20-22], but recent demonstrations
of orthogonally-polarized dual comb generation in microresonators are sparking a renewed interest
in this process [23]. In this Letter, we report on the direct experimental observation of PMI in a
passive Kerr resonator. Our experimental test-bed is based on a normally dispersive fiber ring
cavity that incorporates a polarization controller for adjustment of the intra-cavity birefringence.
This localized birefringence gives rise to a relative phase detuning between the two orthogonal
polarization modes of the cavity, which in turn affects the frequency shift of the PMI sidebands.
We also find that birefringence can lead to period-doubled (P2) dynamics, characterized by a two
round-trip cycle. Our experimental results are in good agreement with theoretical predictions
and numerical simulations based on an iterative two-component Ikeda map. The experimental setup
is displayed in Fig. 1(a). It consists of a L = 12-m long passive fiber ring cavity with a finesse F of
about 27, mainly built out of spun fiber. To avoid competition with scalar MI [2], we have built a cavity
with normal group-velocity dispersion estimated to 2 = 47 ps 2 /km, a value large enough to neglect
third-order dispersion. Also, the use of a spun fiber (nearly isotropic) avoids group-velocity
mismatch between the polarization components. Additionally, to prevent any additional source
of bending-induced birefringence, the fiber was carefully off-spooled and wound directly on our
experimental board with a large 50-cm diameter. We estimate that this causes a birefringence $\Delta$n
no greater than 10 --8 [24], which can be neglected in our study. 