Objective: Realistic tissue-mimicking phantoms are essential for the development, the investigation
and the calibration of medical imaging techniques and protocols. Because it requires taking both
mechanical and imaging properties into account, the development of robust, calibrated phantoms
is a major challenge in elastography. Soft polyvinyl chloride gels in a liquid plasticizer (plastisol
or PVCP) have been proposed as soft tissue-mimicking phantoms (TMP) for elasticity imaging. PVCP
phantoms are relatively low-cost and can be easily stored over long time periods without any specific
requirements. In this work, the preparation of a PVCP gel phantom for both MR and ultrasoundelastography
is proposed and its acoustic, NMR and mechanical properties are studied.Material and methods:
The acoustic and magnetic resonance imaging properties of PVCP are measured for different mass
ratios between ultrasound speckle particles and PVCP solution, and between resin and plasticizer.
The linear mechanical properties of plastisol samples are then investigated over time using not
only indentation tests, but also MR and ultrasound-elastography clinical protocols. These properties
are compared to typical values reported for biological soft tissues and to the values found in the
literature for PVCP gels.Results and conclusions: After a period of two weeks, the mechanical properties
of the plastisol samples measured with indentation testing are stable for at least the following
4 weeks (end of follow-up period 43 days after gelation-fusion). Neither the mechanical nor the
NMR properties of plastisol gels were found to be affected by the addition of cellulose as acoustic
speckle. Mechanical properties of the proposed gels were successfully characterized by clinical,
commercially-available MR Elastography and sonoelastography protocols. PVCP with a mass ratio
of ultrasound speckle particles of 0.6% to 0.8% and a mass ratio between resin and plasticizer between
50 and 70% appears as a good TMP candidate that can be used with both MR and ultrasound-based elastography
methods. 