Objective: The brain operates via generation, transmission and integration of neuronal signals
and most neurological disorders are related to perturbation of these processes. Neurostimulation
by Focused Ultrasound (FUS) is a promising technology with potential to rival other clinically-used
techniques for the investigation of brain function and treatment of numerous neurological diseases.
The purpose of this study was to characterize spatial and temporal aspects of causal electrophysiological
signals directly stimulated by short, single pulses of focused ultrasound (FUS) on ex vivo mouse
hippocampal brain slices. Approach: MicroElectrode Arrays (MEA) are used to study the spatio-temporal
dynamics of extracellular neuronal activities both at the single neuron and neural networks scales.
Hence, MEAs provide an excellent platform for characterization of electrical activity generated,
modulated and transmitted in response to FUS exposure. In this study, a novel mixed FUS/MEA platform
was designed for the spatio-temporal description of the causal responses generated by single 1.78
MHz FUS pulses in ex vivo mouse hippocampal brain slices. Main results: Our results show that FUS
pulses can generate local field potentials (LFPs), sustained by synchronized neuronal post-synaptic
potentials, and reproducing network activities. LFPs induced by FUS stimulation were found to
be repeatable to consecutive FUS pulses though exhibiting a wide range of amplitudes (50-600 $\mu$V),
durations (20-200 ms), and response delays (10-60 ms). Moreover, LFPs were spread across the hippocampal
slice following single FUS pulses thus demonstrating that FUS may be capable of stimulating different
neural structures within the hippocampus. Significance: Current knowledge on neurostimulation
by ultrasound describes neuronal activity generated by trains of repetitive ultrasound pulses.
This novel study details the causal neural responses produced by single-pulse FUS neurostimulation
while illustrating the distribution and propagation properties of this neural activity along
major neural pathways of the hippocampus. 