SUMMARY Geophysical imaging using the inversion procedure is a powerful tool for the exploration
of the Earth's subsurface. However, the interpretation of inverted images can sometimes be difficult,
due to the inherent limitations of existing inversion algorithms, which produce smoothed sections.
In order to improve and automate the processing and interpretation of inverted geophysical models,
we propose an approach inspired from data mining. We selected an algorithm known as DBSCAN (Density-Based
Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise) to perform clustering of inverted geophysical
sections. The methodology relies on the automatic sorting and clustering of data. DBSCAN detects
clusters in the inverted electrical resistivity values, with no prior knowledge of the number of
clusters. This algorithm has the advantage of being defined by only two parameters: the neighbourhood
of a point in the data space, and the minimum number of data points in this neighbourhood. We propose
an objective procedure for the determination of these two parameters. The proof of concept described
here is applied to simulated ERT (electrical resistivity tomography) sections, for the following
three cases: two layers with a step, two layers with a rebound, and two layers with an anomaly embedded
in the upper layer. To validate this approach, sensitivity studies were carried out on both of the
above parameters, as well as to assess the influence of noise on the algorithm's performance. Finally,
this methodology was tested on real field data. DBSCAN detects clusters in the inverted electrical
resistivity models, and the former are then associated with various types of earth materials, thus
allowing the structure of the prospected area to be determined. The proposed data-mining algorithm
is shown to be effective, and to improve the interpretation of the inverted ERT sections. This new
approach has considerable potential, as it can be applied to any geophysical data represented in
the form of sections or maps. 