The mass balance of mountain glaciers is of interest for several applications (local hydrology
or climate projections), and turbulent fluxes can be an important contributor to glacier surface
mass balance during strong melting events. The underlying complex terrain leads to spatial heterogeneity
and non-stationarity of turbulent fluxes. Due to the contribution of thermally-induced flows
and gravity waves, exchange mechanisms are fully three-dimensional, instead of only vertical.
Additionally, glaciers have their own distinct microclimate, governed by a down-glacier katabatic
wind, which protects the glacier ice and interacts with the surrounding flows on multiple scales.
In this study, we perform large-eddy simulations with the WRF model with dx=48 m to gain insight on
the boundary-layer processes over an Alpine valley glacier, the Hintereisferner (HEF). We choose
two case studies from a measurement campaign (August 2018) with different synoptic wind directions
(South-West and North-West). Model evaluation with an array of eddy-covariance stations on the
glacier tongue and surroundings reveals that WRF is able to simulate the general glacier boundary-layer
structure. Under southwesterly airflow, the down-glacier wind is supported by the South-Western
synoptic wind direction, a stable boundary layer is present over the ice surface, and local processes
govern the turbulence kinetic energy production. Under northwesterly airflow, a cross-glacier
valley flow and a breaking gravity wave lead strong turbulent mixing and to the subsequent erosion
of the glacier boundary layer. Stationarity analyses of the sensible heat flux suggest non-stationary
behaviour for both case study days, while non-stationarity is highest on the NW day during the gravity-wave
event. These results suggest that the synoptic wind direction has, in addition to upstream topography
and the atmospheric stability, a strong impact on whether a local glacier boundary layer can form
or not, influencing whether a glacier is able to maintain its own microclimate. 