We study quarkonium transport in the quark-gluon plasma by using the potential nonrelativistic
QCD (pNRQCD) effective field theory and the framework of open quantum systems. We argue that the
coupling between quarkonium and the thermal bath is weak using separation of scales. In the weak
coupling limit, the initial total system density matrix factorizes and the time evolution of the
subsystem is Markovian. We derive the semiclassical Boltzmann equation for quarkonium by applying
a Wigner transform to the Lindblad equation, working in the weak coupling limit and carrying out
a semiclassical expansion. The derivation is valid for both weakly coupled and strongly coupled
quark-gluon plasmas. We find reaction rates in the transport equation factorize into a quarkonium
dipole transition function and a chromoelectric gluon distribution function. For the differential
reaction rate, the definition of the momentum dependent chromoelectric gluon distribution function
involves staple-shaped Wilson lines. For the inclusive reaction rate, the Wilson lines collapse
into a straight line along the real time axis and the distribution becomes momentum independent.
The relation between the two Wilson lines is analogous to the relation between the Wilson lines appearing
in the gluon parton distribution function (PDF) and the gluon transverse momentum dependent parton
distribution function (TMDPDF). The centrality dependence of the quarkonium nuclear modification
factor measured by experiments probes the momentum independent distribution while the transverse
momentum dependence and measurements of the azimuthal angular anisotropy may be able to probe the
momentum dependent one. We discuss one way to indirectly constrain the quarkonium in-medium potential
by using the factorization formula and lattice calculations. The leading quantum correction to
the semiclassical transport equation of quarkonium is also worked out. The study can be easily generalized
to quarkonium transport in cold nuclear matter, which is relevant for quarkonium production in
eA collisions in the future Electron-Ion Collider. 