We explore how to improve the hybrid model description of the particles originating from the wake
that a jet produced in a heavy ion collision leaves in the droplet of quark-gluon plasma (QGP) through
which it propagates, using linearized hydrodynamics on a background Bjorken flow. Jet energy and
momentum loss described by the hybrid model become currents sourcing linearized hydrodynamics.
By solving the linearized hydrodynamic equations numerically, we investigate the development
of the wake in the dynamically evolving droplet of QGP, study the effect of viscosity, scrutinize
energy-momentum conservation, and check the validity of the linear approximation. We find that
linearized hydrodynamics works better in the viscous case because diffusive modes damp the energy-momentum
perturbation produced by the jet. We calculate the distribution of particles produced from the
jet wake by using the Cooper-Frye prescription and find that both the transverse momentum spectrum
and the distribution of particles in azimuthal angle are similar in shape in linearized hydrodynamics
and in the hybrid model. Their normalizations are different because the momentum-rapidity distribution
in the linearized hydrodynamics analysis is more spread out, due to sound modes. Since the Bjorken
flow has no transverse expansion, we explore the effect of transverse flow by using local boosts
to add it into the Cooper-Frye formula. After including the effects of transverse flow in this way,
the transverse momentum spectrum becomes harder: more particles with transverse momenta bigger
than $2$ GeV are produced than in the hybrid model. Although we defer implementing this analysis
in a jet Monte Carlo, as would be needed to make quantitative comparisons to data, we gain a qualitative
sense of how the jet wake may modify jet observables by computing proxies for two example observables:
the lost energy recovered in a cone of varying open angle, and the fragmentation function. We find
that linearized hydrodynamics with transverse flow effects added improves the description of
the jet wake in the hybrid model in just the way that comparison to data indicates is needed. Our study
illuminates a path to improving the description of the wake in the hybrid model, highlighting the
need to take into account the effects of both transverse flow and the broadening of the energy-momentum
perturbation in spacetime rapidity on particle production. 