Reduction in aircraft emission is a main driver for the development of more efficient aircraft and
enabling technologies are reaching operational maturity. Aircraft manufacturers need an efficient
product development process to capture these emergent technologies and develop new aircraft concepts
in order to stay competitive. Presently, the aircraft development process is cross organizational,
and harnesses distributed, heterogeneous knowledge and expertise. Large scale multidisciplinary
studies, involving disciplinary experts and specific tools are required to evaluate different
aircraft concepts. These MultiDisciplinary Aircraft Optimization (MDAO) processes are difficult
to deploy as they involve cross-organizational collaboration and harmonization of processes,
tools and even vocabulary. Moreover, difficulties in collaborative decision making, reconfiguration
and integration of new requirements and competencies often precludes the development of an optimal
solution within the available time. To address these challenges, the AGILE project is an effort
within the European Union funded Horizon 2020 project to reduce aircraft development time by developing
tools and processes that enable efficient, collaborative aircraft design. This paper presents
the work performed as part of the AGILE academy challenge where students were tasked with developing
and solving an aircraft MDAO problem using the AGILE toolchain. Each team consisted of students
from various universities around the globe and had expertise in multiple design domains. An MDAO
study is presented that utilizes the AGILE toolchain to investigate the feasibility of implementing
an auxiliary solar power system on a baseline aircraft. The steps performed are: (1) definition
of a multidisciplinary design problem, (2) development of collaborative workflow and (3) optimization
using surrogate models. Through the case study, a novel technology concept is investigated and
the efficacy of the AGILE toolchain in facilitating a MDAO is analyzed. 