A wide variety of real life complex networks are prohibitively large for modeling, analysis and
control. Understanding the structure and dynamics of such networks entails creating a smaller
representative network that preserves its relevant topological and dynamical properties. While
modern machine learning methods have enabled identification of governing laws for complex dynamical
systems, their inability to produce white-box models with sufficient physical interpretation
renders such methods undesirable to domain experts. In this paper, we introduce a hybrid black-box,
white-box approach for the sparse identification of the governing laws for complex, highly coupled
dynamical systems with particular emphasis on finding the influential reactions in chemical reaction
networks for combustion applications, using a data-driven sparse-learning technique. The proposed
approach identifies a set of influential reactions using species concentrations and reaction
rates,with minimal computational cost without requiring additional data or simulations. The
new approach is applied to analyze the combustion chemistry of H2 and C3H8 in a constant-volume homogeneous
reactor. The influential reactions determined by the sparse-learning method are consistent with
the current kinetics knowledge of chemical mechanisms. Additionally, we show that a reduced version
of the parent mechanism can be generated as a combination of the significantly reduced influential
reactions identified at different times and conditions and that for both H2 and C3H8 fuel, the reduced
mechanisms perform closely to the parent mechanisms as a function of the ignition delay time over
a wide range of conditions. Our results demonstrate the potential of the sparse-learning approach
as an effective and efficient tool for dynamical system analysis and reduction. The uniqueness
of this approach as applied to combustion systems lies in the ability to identify influential reactions
in specified conditions and times during the evolution of the combustion process. This ability
is of great interest to understand chemical reaction systems. 