We investigate a class of moment problems, namely recovering a measure supported on the graph of
a function from partial knowledge of its moments, as for instance in some problems of optimal transport
or density estimation. We show that the sole knowledge of first degree moments of the function, namely
linear measurements, is sufficient to obtain asymptotically all the other moments by solving a
hierarchy of semidefinite relax-ations (viewed as moment matrix completion problems) with a specific
sparsity inducing criterion related to a weighted 1-norm of the moment sequence of the measure.
The resulting sequence of optimal solutions converges to the whole moment sequence of the measure
which is shown to be the unique optimal solution of a certain infinite-dimensional linear optimization
problem (LP). Then one may recover the function by a recent extraction algorithm based on the Christoffel-Darboux
kernel associated with the measure. Finally, the support of such a measure supported on a graph is
a meager, very thin (hence sparse) set. Therefore the LP on measures with this sparsity inducing
criterion can be interpreted as an analogue for infinite-dimensional signals of the LP in super-resolution
for (sparse) atomic signals. In data science, it is often relevant to process moments of a signal
instead of the signal itself. For complex valued signals, the moments are Fourier coefficients,
and many filtering operations are efficiently carried out in the sequence of moments. In numerical
approximation algorithms, many operations on real valued signals are more efficiently implemented
in their sequence of Chebyshev coefficients [19]. In the moment-SOS hierarchy approach, many nonlinear
nonconvex problems are reformulated and solved approximately in the sequence of moments; see [13,
12] and references therein. Once moments or approximate moments have been computed, one is faced
with the inverse problem of reconstructing the signal from its moments. The recent work [15] describes
an algorithm based on the Christoffel-Darboux kernel, to recover the graph of a function from knowledge
of its moments. Its novelty (and distinguishing feature) is to approximate the graph of the function
(rather than the function itself) with a semialgebraic function (namely a minimizer of a sum of squares
of polynomials) with L 1 and pointwise convergence guarantees for an increasing number of input
moments. In 