Semi-active vibration reduction techniques are defined as techniques in which controlled actions
do not operate directly on the system's degrees of freedom (like in the case of active vibration control)
but on the system's parameters, e.g. mass or stiffness. In literature, semi-active systems are
claimed to involve substantially less energy than active. Cyclic variation in the stiffness of
a structural system was addressed in several past contributions as an effective semi-active vibration
reduction method. The presented applications range from step-wise stiffness variations on a simple
spring-mass system to continuous stiffness changes on rotor blades under aerodynamic loads. Beyond
these diversities, a general statement about the potential of the method on the basis of this published
work is made difficult by the complexity and different nature of the physical devices used to modify
the stiffness of the considered systems. Those devices mostly introduce spurious effects (loads,
damping or friction) which superpose to the vibration suppression part related to the stiffness
variation. In particular, a considerable portion of the vibration suppression can result from
negative work performed on the system by the device in charge of the stiffness variation, which would
de facto classify the approach as active vibration suppression. This work focuses on theoretical
considerations on the truly semi-active mechanism of vibration reduction by cyclic stiffness
variation, which - as shown on simple spring-mass systems - is related to transfer of energy within
the system from lower to higher vibration modes. We will use for this vibration reduction mechanism
the term stiffness modulation to distinguish it from undifferentiated methods, for which the designations
"variable stiffness" or "switched stiffness" is used. In most cases, the modulation-related,
semi-active component of the vibration reduction coexists with a spurious (active, in the sense
discussed above) contribution due to the work performed by the stiffness variation interface as
well as with the passive contribution of dissipative effects or devices. We will show that the spurious
active component can be diminished compared to the other contributions in dependence of the stiffness
characteristic. 